Guide update - How to configure and rebuild software RAID (#8252)
ovh/docs: pages/bare_metal_cloud/dedicated_servers/raid_soft_uefi/guide.en-gb.md

configfs on /sys/kernel/config type configfs (rw,nosuid,nodev,noexec,relatime)
/dev/md2 on /boot type ext4 (rw,relatime)
/dev/nvme0n1p1 on /boot/efi type vfat (rw,relatime,fmask=0022,dmask=0022,codepage=437,iocharset=ascii,shortname=mixed,utf8,errors=remount-ro)
tmpfs on /run/user/1000 type tmpfs (rw,nosuid,nodev,relatime,size=3275184k,nr_inodes=818796,mode=700,uid=1000,gid=1000)
```

Alternatively, the `lsblk` command offers a different view of the partitions:

```sh
lsblk
NAME        MAJ:MIN RM   SIZE RO TYPE  MOUNTPOINT
nvme1n1     259:0    0 476.9G  0 disk
├─nvme1n1p1 259:7    0   511M  0 part
├─nvme1n1p2 259:8    0     1G  0 part
│ └─md2       9:2    0  1022M  0 raid1 /boot
├─nvme1n1p3 259:9    0 474.9G  0 part
│ └─md3       9:3    0 474.8G  0 raid1 /
└─nvme1n1p4 259:10   0   512M  0 part  [SWAP]
nvme0n1     259:1    0 476.9G  0 disk
├─nvme0n1p1 259:2    0   511M  0 part  /boot/efi
├─nvme0n1p2 259:3    0     1G  0 part
│ └─md2       9:2    0  1022M  0 raid1 /boot
├─nvme0n1p3 259:4    0 474.9G  0 part
│ └─md3       9:3    0 474.8G  0 raid1 /
├─nvme0n1p4 259:5    0   512M  0 part  [SWAP]
└─nvme0n1p5 259:6    0     2M  0 part
```

> We take note of the devices, partitions and their mount points.

Reviewer: Inconsistent betwen BIOS and UEFI guides:
<img width="1997" height="106" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/62648ed5-e668-4ba4-89ba-eac42d481cf2" />

From the above commands and results, we have:

- Two RAID arrays: `/dev/md2` and `/dev/md3`.
- Partitions part of the RAID: `/boot` and `/`.
- Partitions not part of the RAID: `/boot/efi` and [SWAP].

### System verification

To check whether a server runs on BIOS mode or UEFI mode, run the following command:

```sh
[user@server_ip ~]# [ -d /sys/firmware/efi ] && echo UEFI || echo BIOS
```

> ### Understanding the EFI partition

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Understanding the EFI System Partition (ESP)
```

> To begin let's understand what is UEFI mode. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To begin let's understand what EFI mode is. 
```

For consistency, we should use EFI everywhere, not UEFI

> [!primary]

> > Please note that depending on your operating system, the process might be different. Ubuntu for example is able to keep both partitions synchronized at every GRUB update. However, it is the only operating system doing so. We recommend that you consult the official documentation of your operating system to understand how to manage this partition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Please note that depending on your operating system, the process might be different. Ubuntu for example is able to keep several UEFI System Partitions synchronized at every GRUB update. However, it is the only operating system doing so. We recommend that you consult the official documentation of your operating system to understand how to manage ESPs.
```

>
> In the guide, the operating system used is Debian.
> 

> ***What is an EFI partition?***

Reviewer: ```suggestion
***What is an EFI System Partition?***
```
Please always use "EFI System Partition" or ESP for consistency. I don't see much documentation that uses the word "EFI partition".

> An EFI partition, is a partition which can contain the boot loaders, boot managers, or kernel images of an installed operating system. It also contains system utility programs designed to be run before the operating system boots, as well as data files such as error logs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An EFI partition is a partition which can contain the boot loaders, boot managers, or kernel images of an installed operating system. It may also contain system utility programs designed to be run before the operating system boots, as well as data files such as error logs.
```

***Is the EFI partition mirrored in RAID?***

> No, by default, the EFI partition is a partition that cannot be included in the RAID. When you use one of our default installation templates to install your server in a software RAID, two EFI partitions are created, one on each disk. However, only one EFI partition is mounted and used for the operating system installation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No, as of August 2025, when the OS installation is performed by OVHcloud, the ESP is not included in the RAID. When you use our OS templates to install your server with software RAID, several EFI System Partitions are created: one per disk. However, only one EFI partition is mounted at once.
```

> The partition is mounted on the mount point: `/boot/efi` and the disk on which it is mounted is selected randomly by the operating system during installation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ESP is mounted at `/boot/efi` and the disk on which it is mounted is selected by Linux at boot.
```
I don't think it is random so I would avoid using this word.

Reviewer: And you should add an example /etc/fstab to show that the partition is mounted by its LABEL.

Example:

```sh

> lsblk

Reviewer: Please use lsblk -f here. It is better suited for showing partition labels and so on.
I don't think lsblk has interesting information compared to the -f variant.
Alternatively, just add the LABEL column to the default view:
```
$ lsblk -o +LABEL
NAME        MAJ:MIN RM   SIZE RO TYPE  MOUNTPOINTS LABEL
nvme0n1     259:0    0 476.9G  0 disk              
├─nvme0n1p1 259:1    0   511M  0 part  /boot/efi   EFI_SYSPART
├─nvme0n1p2 259:2    0     1G  0 part              md2
│ └─md2       9:2    0  1022M  0 raid1 /boot       boot
└─nvme0n1p3 259:3    0  19.5G  0 part              md3
  └─md3       9:3    0  19.5G  0 raid1 /           root
nvme1n1     259:4    0 476.9G  0 disk              
├─nvme1n1p1 259:5    0   511M  0 part              EFI_SYSPART
├─nvme1n1p2 259:6    0     1G  0 part              md2
│ └─md2       9:2    0  1022M  0 raid1 /boot       boot
├─nvme1n1p3 259:7    0  19.5G  0 part              md3
│ └─md3       9:3    0  19.5G  0 raid1 /           root
└─nvme1n1p4 259:8    0     2M  0 part              config-2  
```

NAME        MAJ:MIN RM   SIZE RO TYPE  MOUNTPOINT
nvme1n1     259:0    0 476.9G  0 disk
├─nvme1n1p1 259:7    0   511M  0 part
├─nvme1n1p2 259:8    0     1G  0 part
│ └─md2       9:2    0  1022M  0 raid1 /boot
├─nvme1n1p3 259:9    0 474.9G  0 part
│ └─md3       9:3    0 474.8G  0 raid1 /
└─nvme1n1p4 259:10   0   512M  0 part  [SWAP]
nvme0n1     259:1    0 476.9G  0 disk
├─nvme0n1p1 259:2    0   511M  0 part  /boot/efi
├─nvme0n1p2 259:3    0     1G  0 part
│ └─md2       9:2    0  1022M  0 raid1 /boot
├─nvme0n1p3 259:4    0 474.9G  0 part
│ └─md3       9:3    0 474.8G  0 raid1 /
├─nvme0n1p4 259:5    0   512M  0 part  [SWAP]
└─nvme0n1p5 259:6    0     2M  0 part
```

From the example above, we see that we have two identical EFI partitions (nvme0n1p1 and nvme1n1p1) but only **nvme0n1p1** is mounted on `/boot/efi`.

We can also use the following command to confirm that two EFI partitions have been created after installation:

```sh

> sudo lsblk -f

Reviewer: ```suggestion
lsblk -f
```
No need for sudo here

├─nvme1n1p3 linux_raid_member 1.2              md3            ce0c7fac-0032-054c-eef7-7463b2245519
│ └─md3     ext4              1.0              root           6fea39e9-6297-4ea3-82f1-bf1a3e88106a  441.3G     0% /
└─nvme1n1p4 swap              1                swap-nvme1n1p4 483b9b41-ada3-4143-8cac-5bff7afb73c7                [SWAP]
nvme0n1
├─nvme0n1p1 vfat              FAT16            EFI_SYSPART    B486-9781                             504.9M     1% /boot/efi
├─nvme0n1p2 linux_raid_member 1.2              md2            baae988b-bef3-fc07-615f-6f9043cfd5ea
│ └─md2     ext4              1.0              boot           96850c4e-e2b5-4048-8c39-525194e441aa  851.8M     7% /boot
├─nvme0n1p3 linux_raid_member 1.2              md3            ce0c7fac-0032-054c-eef7-7463b2245519
│ └─md3     ext4              1.0              root           6fea39e9-6297-4ea3-82f1-bf1a3e88106a  441.3G     0% /
├─nvme0n1p4 swap              1                swap-nvme0n1p4 51e7172b-adb0-4729-b0f8-613e5dede38b                [SWAP]
└─nvme0n1p5 iso9660           Joliet Extension config-2       2025-08-05-14-55-41-00
```

> From the results above, we can see two partitions (**nvme0n1p1** and **nvme1n1p1**), with identical size (504.9M). Both partitions have the LABEL: `EFI_SYSPART` but only one is mounted.

Reviewer: That's size available, not size.

***Does the content of EFI partition change regularly?***

> In general, the contents of this partition do not change much, except when there are relevant updates such as grub/kernel updates or even simple `apt` or `yum` updates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In general, the contents of this partition do not change much. As the ESP usually only contains the bootloader, its content should only change on bootloader (e.g. GRUB) updates.
```

> In this case, we recommend running an automatic or manual script to synchronise the partitions. This is because if the main disk on which this partition is mounted fails, you can use rescue mode to recover it by recreating a new EFI partition on the new disk and copying the contents of the second partition to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Still, we recommend running an automatic or manual script to keep all ESPs in sync. This way, if one disk fails, the remaining ESPs will still contain up-to-date files.
You will then be able to use rescue mode to recreate a new ESP and restore it from a healthy one.
```

***What happens if my main disk fails and is replaced?***

> If your server's main disk fails and is replaced, the server will be restarted in rescue mode so that you can rebuild the RAID. Since the EFI partition is not mirrored, the server will not be able to boot from the secondary disk (in most cases). You can rebuild the RAID in rescue mode, recreate the EFI partition, and the drive should be able to boot.

Reviewer: > Since the EFI partition is not mirrored

That is incorrect, ESPs are mirrored once when the OS is installed. Then, except on Ubuntu, we let users handle the sync. I would drop this whole section as it seems wrong to me. In most cases, the OS will boot (unless there was a major update, something which the following section addresses).

> ***What if the main disk fails and I did not synchronise my EFI partitions after a major update (kernel/grub)?*** 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
***What if one disk fails and I did not synchronise my EFI partitions after a major update (kernel/grub)?*** 
```

As I said in the BIOS/legacy guide, I think we should remove all mentions of "main" and "secondary" disks. All disks are equal. The **only** difference is the cloud-init configdrive partition which serves no purpose after the installation.

> If this is the case, you will have to rebuild the RAID in rescue mode, create an EFI partition on the new disk and install the grub/kernel update in rescue mode. If you are not able to perform some manipulations, we recommend contacting a professional service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If this is the case, after rebuilding the RAID in rescue mode, you may have to create an ESP on the new disk and reinstall the bootloader (e.g. GRUB).
Indeed, in some cases, booting from an out-of-date ESP may not work. For instance, a major GRUB update could cause the old GRUB binary present in the ESP to be incompatible with newer GRUB modules installed in the `/boot` partition.
```

I dropped the "professional service" part, it seemed weird. Maybe you meant OVHcloud's Professional Services?

***How can I keep my EFI partitions synchronized or how often should I sychronize them?***

We recommend synchronizing both partitions daily or whenever there are major updates on your system. Below is a script you can use to manually synchronize your EFI partitions. You can also run an automated script to synchronize the partitions daily or when the service is booted.

> ```sh

Reviewer: Missing bash shebang. Also, I think we can do this to avoid having to hardcode the name of the main ESP:
```sh
#!/bin/bash

set -euo pipefail

MOUNTPOINT="/var/lib/grub/esp"
MAIN_PARTITION=$(findmnt -n -o SOURCE /boot/efi)

echo "${MAIN_PARTITION} is the main partition"

mkdir -p "${MOUNTPOINT}"

while read -r partition; do
    if [[ "${partition}" == "${MAIN_PARTITION}" ]]; then
        continue
    fi
    echo "Working on ${partition}"
    mount "${partition}" "${MOUNTPOINT}"
    rsync -ax "/boot/efi/" "${MOUNTPOINT}/"
    umount "${MOUNTPOINT}"
done < <(blkid -o device -t LABEL=EFI_SYSPART)
```

set -euo pipefail

findmnt -n -o SOURCE /boot/efi
MAIN_PARTITION=/dev/ # sdX or nvmeXnXpX
MOUNTPOINT="/var/lib/grub/esp"

mkdir -p "${MOUNTPOINT}"

while read -r partition; do
    if [[ "${partition}" == "${MAIN_PARTITION}" ]]; then
        continue
    fi
    echo "Working on ${partition}"
    mount "${partition}" "${MOUNTPOINT}"
    rsync -ax "/boot/efi/" "${MOUNTPOINT}/"
    umount "${MOUNTPOINT}"
done < <(blkid -o device -t LABEL=EFI_SYSPART)
```

> In the script above, the `MAIN_PARTITION` is the one mounted on /boot/efi and `MOUNTPOINT` is where you want to sync the contents.

Reviewer: Not needed if you use the updated script I gave you

Before you run the script, make sure `rsync` is installed:

**Debian/Ubuntu**

```sh
sudo apt install rsync
```

**CentOS, Red Hat and Fedora**

```sh
sudo yum install rsync
```

Example:

```sh

> set -euo pipefail

Reviewer: Can be removed after using the updated script where nothing is hardcoded

findmnt -n -o SOURCE /boot/efi
MAIN_PARTITION=/dev/nvme0n1p1
MOUNTPOINT="/var/lib/grub/esp"

mkdir -p "${MOUNTPOINT}"

while read -r partition; do
    if [[ "${partition}" == "${MAIN_PARTITION}" ]]; then
        continue
    fi
    echo "Working on ${partition}"
    mount "${partition}" "${MOUNTPOINT}"
    rsync -ax "/boot/efi/" "${MOUNTPOINT}/"
    umount "${MOUNTPOINT}"
done < <(blkid -o device -t LABEL=EFI_SYSPART)
```

In the example above, the main partition is `nvme0n1p1` and the mountpoint we use is `/var/lib/grub/esp`.

### Simulating a disk failure

> Now that we have all the necessary information, we can simulate a disk failure and proceed with the tests. In this example, we will fail the main disk `nvme0n1`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we have all the necessary information, we can simulate a disk failure and proceed with the tests. In this example, we will fail `nvme0n1`.
```

The preferred way to do this is via the OVHcloud rescue mode environment.

> First reboot the server in rescue menu and log in with the credentials provided.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First reboot the server in rescue mode and log in with the provided credentials.
```

To remove a disk from the RAID, the first step is to mark it as **Failed** and remove the partitions from their respective RAID arrays.

```sh

> root@rescue12-customer-ca (nsxxxxx.ip-xx-xx-xx.eu) ~ # cat /proc/mdstat

Reviewer: I think this prompt is nice. However, it's not consistent across commands from both guides.

```sh
sudo mdadm --manage /dev/md2 --fail /dev/nvme0n1p2

# mdadm: set /dev/nvme0n1p2 faulty in /dev/md2
```

```sh
sudo mdadm --manage /dev/md3 --fail /dev/nvme0n1p3

# mdadm: set /dev/nvme0n1p3 faulty in /dev/md3
```

We have now simulated a failure of the RAID, when we run the `cat /proc/mdstat` command, we have the following output

```sh
root@rescue12-customer-ca (nsxxxxx.ip-xx-xx-xx.eu) ~ # cat /proc/mdstat
Personalities : [linear] [raid0] [raid1] [raid10] [raid6] [raid5] [raid4] [multipath] [faulty]
md3 : active raid1 nvme0n1p3[0](F) nvme1n1p3[1]
      497875968 blocks super 1.2 [2/1] [_U]
      bitmap: 0/4 pages [0KB], 65536KB chunk

md2 : active raid1 nvme0n1p2[2](F) nvme1n1p2[1]
      1046528 blocks super 1.2 [2/1] [_U]

unused devices: <none>
```

As we can see above, the [F] next to the partitions indicates that the disk has failed or is faulty.

Next, we remove these partitions from the RAID arrays to completely remove the disk from RAID.

```sh
sudo mdadm --manage /dev/md2 --remove /dev/nvme0n1p2

# mdadm: hot removed /dev/nvme0n1p2 from /dev/md2
```

```sh
sudo mdadm --manage /dev/md3 --remove /dev/nvme0n1p3

# mdadm: hot removed /dev/nvme0n1p3 from /dev/md3
```

> To make sure that we get a disk that is similar to an empty disk, we use the following command on each partition, then on the disk:

Reviewer: That's nice. You don't do that in the legacy part, you just do it for the disk. Can you fix it there?

```sh
shred -s10M -n1 /dev/nvme0n1p1
shred -s10M -n1 /dev/nvme0n1p2
shred -s10M -n1 /dev/nvme0n1p3
shred -s10M -n1 /dev/nvme0n1p4
shred -s10M -n1 /dev/nvme0n1
```

The disk now appears as a new one:

```sh

> lsblk -A

Reviewer: ```suggestion
lsblk
```

-A is just to hide empty devices. Either add it to all lsblk commands or none of them.

NAME        MAJ:MIN RM   SIZE RO TYPE  MOUNTPOINTS
nvme1n1     259:0    0 476.9G  0 disk
├─nvme1n1p1 259:1    0   511M  0 part
├─nvme1n1p2 259:2    0     1G  0 part
│ └─md2       9:2    0  1022M  0 raid1
├─nvme1n1p3 259:3    0 474.9G  0 part
│ └─md3       9:3    0 474.8G  0 raid1
└─nvme1n1p4 259:4    0   512M  0 part
nvme0n1     259:5    0 476.9G  0 disk
```

If we run the following command, we see that our disk has been successfully "wiped":

```sh

> parted /dev/nvme0n1

Reviewer: That's nice, could be added to the legacy guide too

GNU Parted 3.5
Using /dev/nvme0n1
Welcome to GNU Parted! Type 'help' to view a list of commands.
(parted) p
Error: /dev/nvme0n1: unrecognised disk label
Model: WDC CL SN720 SDAQNTW-512G-2000 (nvme)
Disk /dev/nvme0n1: 512GB
Sector size (logical/physical): 512B/512B
Partition Table: unknown
Disk Flags:
```

Our RAID status should now look like this:

```sh
root@rescue12-customer-ca (ns5009452.ip-51-222-254.net) ~ # cat /proc/mdstat
Personalities : [linear] [raid0] [raid1] [raid10] [raid6] [raid5] [raid4] [multipath] [faulty]
md3 : active raid1 nvme1n1p3[1]
      497875968 blocks super 1.2 [2/1] [_U]
      bitmap: 0/4 pages [0KB], 65536KB chunk

md2 : active raid1 nvme1n1p2[1]
      1046528 blocks super 1.2 [2/1] [_U]

unused devices: <none>
```

> Based on the above results, we can see that only two partitions now appear in the RAID arrays. We have successfully failed the **nvme0n1** drive and can now proceed with replacing the drive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Based on the above results, we can see that only two partitions now appear in the RAID arrays. We have successfully failed the **nvme0n1** drive and can now proceed with replacing it.
```

     Intent Bitmap : Internal

       Update Time : Fri Aug  1 15:56:17 2025
             State : clean, degraded
    Active Devices : 1
   Working Devices : 1
    Failed Devices : 0
     Spare Devices : 0

Consistency Policy : bitmap

              Name : md3
              UUID : b383c3d5:7fb1bb5e:6b7c4d96:6ea817ff
            Events : 215

    Number   Major   Minor   RaidDevice State
       -       0        0        0      removed
       1     259        4        1      active sync   /dev/nvme1n1p3
```

### Rebuilding the RAID

The following steps document the RAID rebuild in rescue mode.

> [!primary]
> This process might be different depending on the operating system you have installed on your server. We recommend that you consult the official documentation of your operating system to have access to the proper commands.
>

> [!warning]
>
> For most servers in software RAID, after a disk replacement, the server is able to reboot in normal mode (on the healthy disk) and the rebuild can be done in normal mode. However, if the server is not able to reboot in normal mode after a disk replacement, it will be rebooted in rescue mode to proceed with the raid rebuild.
>

> > If your server is able to boot in normal mode after the RAID rebuilding, simply proceed with the steps from [this section]().

Reviewer: Broken link

> #### Rebuilding the RAID after the main disk is replaced

Reviewer: I don't get the "main"/"secondary" distinction here. All disks contain the same partitions. There is no "main" disk, is there?

Author: @sbraz the main/secondary is in relation to the disk with the mounted partition. Yes, both disks contain the partition but if the one on which the partition is mounted (I call it "main disk") fails, the server won't be able to reboot in normal mode. Whereas if the other disk (I call it "seconday disk") fails, the server can still boot. Am I understanding this properly?

Reviewer: OK so this is specific to the ESP then? In that case, yes, the disk whose ESP is mounted is the "main" one. But if you're in rescue, good luck finding out whether the replaced disk was main or secondary. Even logs don't show this:
```
# journalctl -b --unit boot-efi.mount -o cat
Mounting boot-efi.mount - /boot/efi...
Mounted boot-efi.mount - /boot/efi.
```

If you assume that ESPs have been kept in sync, it doesn't matter which one was the "main" disk. If they were **not** kept in sync, you might need to reinstall the boot loader because you can't know if the remaining ESP is the "main" up-to-date one or the "secondary" outdated one.

Author: @sbraz I assume the client will have this information when he request for a disk replacement since he will have to provide the S/N of the disk to replace or the one NOT to replace. In one way if the server does not boot back in normal mode  (if both ESPs weren't kept in sync) he will conclude that it is the "main" disk that was replaced as opposed to if the server boots back because both ESPs were kept in sync, it won't matter to them. All this is based on an assumption of course.

Reviewer: OK, that works for me. But we need to clarify what main and secondary mean in the preamble of this documentation page:
* The main disk is the disk whose ESP is mounted by Linux (I assume this is always the same but I'm sure kernel upgrades or other factors could influence this)
* The secondary disk(s) are all the other disks in the RAID

> Here, we assume that the EFI partitions have been kept in sync (including after GRUB/kernel updates. If that is not your case, we have provided additional information on how to proceed).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, we assume that the EFI partitions have been kept in sync (including after system updates). If that is not your case, we have provided additional information on how to proceed.
```

Once the disk has been replaced, we need to copy the partition table from the healthy disk (in this example, nvme1n1) to the new one (nvme0n1).

> [!tabs]

> > **For GPT partitions**

Reviewer: You don't need tabs. AFAIK, we've never installed EFI boot servers with MBR, only GPT.

```

Once the RAID rebuild is complete, run the following command to make sure that the partitions have been properly added to the RAID:

```sh
lsblk -fA
NAME        FSTYPE            FSVER LABEL          UUID                                 FSAVAIL FSUSE% MOUNTPOINTS
nvme1n1
├─nvme1n1p1 vfat              FAT16 EFI_SYSPART    4629-D183
├─nvme1n1p2 linux_raid_member 1.2   md2            83719c5c-2a27-2a56-5268-7d49d8a1d84f
│ └─md2     ext4              1.0   boot           4de80ae0-dd90-4256-9135-1735e7be4b4d
├─nvme1n1p3 linux_raid_member 1.2   md3            b383c3d5-7fb1-bb5e-6b7c-4d966ea817ff
│ └─md3     ext4              1.0   root           9bf386b6-9523-46bf-b8e5-4b8cc7c5786f
└─nvme1n1p4 swap              1     swap-nvme1n1p4 9bf292e8-0145-4d2f-b891-4cef93c0d209
nvme0n1
├─nvme0n1p1
├─nvme0n1p2 linux_raid_member 1.2   md2            83719c5c-2a27-2a56-5268-7d49d8a1d84f
│ └─md2     ext4              1.0   boot           4de80ae0-dd90-4256-9135-1735e7be4b4d
├─nvme0n1p3 linux_raid_member 1.2   md3            b383c3d5-7fb1-bb5e-6b7c-4d966ea817ff
│ └─md3     ext4              1.0   root           9bf386b6-9523-46bf-b8e5-4b8cc7c5786f
└─nvme0n1p4
```

> Based on the above results, we can see that the partitions on our newly added drive have been successfully added to the RAID. However, the EFI partition has not been duplicated, which is normal since it is not included in the RAID. We also note that the [SWAP] partition **nvme0n1p4** no longer has a label (this will not be the case in all situations, especially if you customise your partitions before installing your server).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Based on the above results, we can see that the partitions on our newly added drive have been successfully added to the RAID. However, the EFI partition has not been duplicated, which is normal since it is not included in the RAID.
```

I wouldn't mention the SWAP partition here. I don't think you did in the legacy guide?

> [!warning]
> The examples above are merely illustrating the necessary steps based on a default server configuration. The information in the output table depends on your server's hardware and its partition scheme. When in doubt, consult the documentation of your operating system.
> 

> > If you require professional assistance with server administration, consider the details in the [Go further]() section of this guide.

Reviewer: Broken link

>

#### Recreating the EFI partition

The next step is to format **nvme0n1p1** to recreate the EFI partition, then copy the content of the secondary EFI partition (in our example: nvme1n1) to this one.

> We have an updated version of the partition, as we assume that both partitions have been synchronised. If the two partitions have not been synchronised after major updates (particularly GRUB), you are copying an older version of the partition to the new one. In this case, it is imperative to install these updates before restarting the server in normal mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, we assume that both partitions have been synchronised and contain up-to-date files.
```
I think the warning below is enough for the "partitions not in sync" case.

> [!warning]

> > If there was a kernel or grub update or a major update and both partitions were not synchronized, consult the following guide [Repairing the GRUB bootloader](/pages/public_cloud/compute/repairing_the_grub_bootloader) once you are done creating the new EFI partition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> If there was a kernel or grub update or a major update and both partitions were not synchronised, consult the following guide: [Repairing the GRUB bootloader](/pages/public_cloud/compute/repairing_the_grub_bootloader) once you are done creating the new EFI System Partition.
```

>

First, we format the partition:

```sh
mkfs.vfat /dev/nvme0n1p1
```

> Next, we label the partition as `EFI_SYSPART` (this naming is proper to OVHcloud)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we label the partition as `EFI_SYSPART` (this naming is specific to OVHcloud)
```
I think it sounds better? But ignore me if you think it's wrong: I'm not a native speaker.

```sh
fatlabel /dev/nvme0n1p1 EFI_SYSPART
```

> We now need to duplicate the contents of the nvme1n1p1 partition (the partition in good condition) to nvme0n1p1 (the new partition). To do this, we start by creating two folders named ‘old’ and ‘new’.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We now need to duplicate the contents of the nvme1n1p1 partition (the healthy partition) to nvme0n1p1 (the new partition). To do this, we start by creating two folders named ‘old’ and ‘new’.
```

```sh
mkdir old new
```

Next, we mount **nvme1n1p1** in the `old` folder and **nvme0n1p1** in the `new` folder to make the distinction:

```sh
mount /dev/nvme1n1p1 old
mount /dev/nvme0n1p1 new
```

> Next, we copy the files from the `old` folder to the `new` folder. Depending on your operating system, you will have a similar output. Here we are using debian:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we copy the files from the `old` folder to the `new` folder.
```

I dropped mentions of the output as you didn't include it.

> Next, we copy the files from the `old` folder to the `new` folder. Depending on your operating system, you will have a similar output. Here we are using debian:

Reviewer: I see in the next subsection where you perform the changes from the OS itself and not the rescue, you run the sync script. Surely it'd work in rescue too, did you try?

Author: @sbraz I did perform all these steps in rescue mode, I just forgot to add the prompt for rescue mode. Doing that in the next update. Thanks!

```sh

> rsync -axv old/ new/

Reviewer: Maybe drop the -v if not showing the output?

```sh
mount --types proc /proc /mnt/proc
mount --rbind /sys /mnt/sys
mount --make-rslave /mnt/sys
mount --rbind /dev /mnt/dev
mount --make-rslave /mnt/dev
mount --bind /run /mnt/run
mount --make-slave /mnt/run
```

Next, we use the `chroot` command to access the mount point and ensure that the new EFI partition has been created correctly and that the system recognises both EFI partitions:

```sh
chroot /mnt
```

```sh
blkid -t LABEL=EFI_SYSPART
/dev/nvme1n1p1: SEC_TYPE="msdos" LABEL_FATBOOT="EFI_SYSPART" LABEL="EFI_SYSPART" UUID="4629-D183" BLOCK_SIZE="512" TYPE="vfat" PARTLABEL="primary" PARTUUID="889f241b-49c3-4031-b5c9-60df0746f98f"
/dev/nvme0n1p1: SEC_TYPE="msdos" LABEL_FATBOOT="EFI_SYSPART" LABEL="EFI_SYSPART" UUID="521F-300B" BLOCK_SIZE="512" TYPE="vfat" PARTLABEL="primary" PARTUUID="02bf2b2d-7ada-4461-ba50-07683519f65d"
```

/// details | **GRUB/kernel update with EFI partitions not synchronized**

If GRUB/kernel updates have been performed and the EFI partitions were not synchronised, this additional step may be necessary.

Still in the `chroot` environment, we create the `/boot/efi` folder in order to mount the EFI partition **nvme0n1p1**:

```sh

> cd /mnt

Reviewer: I don't think this snippet is correct. Once in the chroot, why would you cd to /mnt?
Also /boot/efi exists in the /boot filesystem so you shouldn't create it in the / filesystem, it could cause issues. I think the issue here is that /boot is not mounted yet (it appears later when `mount -a` though).
I'd recommend replacing the whole snipped with just this:
```sh
mount /boot
mount /dev/nvme0n1p1 /boot/efi
```

mkdir /boot/efi
mount /dev/nvme0n1p1 /boot/efi
```

> Next, we install the grub bootloader to make sure the server can reboot in normal mode on the new disk (you won't have to do this if the disk replaced is the secondary disk. Simply duplicate the EFI partition and proceed to the RAID rebuild, then enable the [SWAP] partition (if applicable)):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we reinstall the GRUB bootloader to make sure the server can reboot in normal mode on the new disk.
Please note that you won't have to do this if ESPs were kept in sync. In that case, simply duplicate the existing ESP and proceed to the RAID rebuild.
```
Maybe link to the "RAID rebuild" section?
I dropped mentions of the SWAP partition as you have a specific section for it below.

```sh
grub-install --efi-directory=/boot/efi /dev/nvme0n1p1
```

> ///

Reviewer: Typo?

<a name="swap-partition"></a>

#### Adding the label to the SWAP partition

> We exit the `chroot` environment, then we recreate our [SWAP] partition **nvme0n1p4** and add the label `swap-nvmenxxx`:

Reviewer: I'd add an "if applicable" note here as not all installations have swap.

```sh
mkswap /dev/nvme0n1p4 -L swap-nvme0n1p4
mkswap: /dev/nvme0n1p4: warning: wiping old swap signature.
Setting up swapspace version 1, size = 512 MiB (536866816 bytes)
LABEL=swap-nvme0n1p4, UUID=b3c9e03a-52f5-4683-81b6-cc10091fcd
```

We verify that the label has been properly applied:

```sh

> lsblk -fA

Reviewer: ```suggestion
lsblk -f
```
See my other comment about -A

NAME FSTYPE FSVER LABEL UUID                                 FSAVAIL FSUSE% MOUNTPOINTS
nvme1n1

├─nvme1n1p1
│    vfat   FAT16 EFI_SYSPART
│                       BA77-E844                             504.9M     1% /root/old
├─nvme1n1p2
│    linux_ 1.2   md2   53409058-480a-bc65-4e1d-6acc848fe233
│ └─md2
│    ext4   1.0   boot  f925a033-0087-40ec-817e-44efab0351ac
├─nvme1n1p3
│    linux_ 1.2   md3   a3b8816c-a5c3-7f01-ee17-e1aa9685c35c
│ └─md3
│    ext4   1.0   root  6abfaa3b-e630-457a-bbe0-e00e5b4b59e5  441.2G     0% /mnt
└─nvme1n1p4
     swap   1     swap-nvme1n1p4
                        d6af33cf-fc15-4060-a43c-cb3b5537f58a
nvme0n1

├─nvme0n1p1
│    vfat   FAT16 EFI_SYSPART
│                       477D-6658
├─nvme0n1p2
│    linux_ 1.2   md2   53409058-480a-bc65-4e1d-6acc848fe233
│ └─md2
│    ext4   1.0   boot  f925a033-0087-40ec-817e-44efab0351ac
├─nvme0n1p3
│    linux_ 1.2   md3   a3b8816c-a5c3-7f01-ee17-e1aa9685c35c
│ └─md3
│    ext4   1.0   root  6abfaa3b-e630-457a-bbe0-e00e5b4b59e5  441.2G     0% /mnt
└─nvme0n1p4
     swap   1     swap-nvme0n1p4
                        b3c9e03a-52f5-4683-81b6-cc10091fcd15
```

> Next, we access the `chroot` environment again:

Reviewer: If we left it. If we didn't have a swap partition, we're still chrooted, right?

```sh
nano etc/fstab
```

Example:

```sh
UUID=6abfaa3b-e630-457a-bbe0-e00e5b4b59e5       /       ext4    defaults       0       1
UUID=f925a033-0087-40ec-817e-44efab0351ac       /boot   ext4    defaults       0       0
LABEL=EFI_SYSPART       /boot/efi       vfat    defaults        0     1
UUID=b7b5dd38-9b51-4282-8f2d-26c65e8d58ec       swap    swap    defaults       0       0
UUID=d6af33cf-fc15-4060-a43c-cb3b5537f58a       swap    swap    defaults       0       0
```

Make sure you replace the proper UUID. In our example above, the UUID to replace is `b7b5dd38-9b51-4282-8f2d-26c65e8d58ec` with the new one `b3c9e03a-52f5-4683-81b6-cc10091fcd15` since the other one belongs to **nvme1n1p4**.

Next, we make sure everything is properly mounted:

```sh
mount -av
/                        : ignored
mount: (hint) your fstab has been modified, but systemd still uses
       the old version; use 'systemctl daemon-reload' to reload.
/boot                    : successfully mounted
/boot/efi                : successfully mounted
swap                     : ignored
swap                     : ignored
```

> We enable the swap partition:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We activate the swap partition:
```

```sh
swapon -av

swapon: /dev/nvme0n1p4: found signature [pagesize=4096, signature=swap]
swapon: /dev/nvme0n1p4: pagesize=4096, swapsize=536870912, devsize=536870912
swapon /dev/nvme0n1p4
swapon: /dev/nvme1n1p4: found signature [pagesize=4096, signature=swap]
swapon: /dev/nvme1n1p4: pagesize=4096, swapsize=536870912, devsize=536870912
swapon /dev/nvme1n1p4
```

> We exit the Chroot environment with `Exit` and unmount all the disks:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We exit the chroot environment with `Exit` and unmount all the disks:
```

Still, we recommend running an automatic or manual script to keep all ESPs in sync. This way, if one disk fails, the remaining ESPs will still contain up-to-date files.
You will then be able to use rescue mode to recreate a new ESP and restore it from a healthy one.

***What if the primary disk mounted on `boot/efi` fails?***

> [!primary]
> Please note that we explore the most common cases below, but there are several other reasons why a server may not start in normal mode after a disk replacement.
> 

**Case study 1** - There have been no changes or major system updates (e.g GRUB) to the OS:

- The server is able to boot in normal mode and you can proceed with the RAID rebuild.
- The server is unable to boot in normal mode, so it is rebooted into rescue mode, where you can rebuild the RAID and recreate the EFI partition on the new disk.

**Case study 2** - There have been major system updates (e.g GRUB) to the OS and the ESPs have been synchronised:

- The server is able to boot in normal mode because all the ESPs contain up-to-date information and the RAID rebuild can be carried out in normal mode.

> - 

Reviewer 2: Either remove the empty bullet point or add a "The server is unable to boot in normal mode..." line in Case Study 2

/boot/efi                : successfully mounted
swap                     : ignored
swap                     : ignored
```

We activate the swap partition:

```sh
root@rescue12-customer-eu:/# swapon -av

swapon: /dev/nvme0n1p4: found signature [pagesize=4096, signature=swap]
swapon: /dev/nvme0n1p4: pagesize=4096, swapsize=536870912, devsize=536870912
swapon /dev/nvme0n1p4
swapon: /dev/nvme1n1p4: found signature [pagesize=4096, signature=swap]
swapon: /dev/nvme1n1p4: pagesize=4096, swapsize=536870912, devsize=536870912
swapon /dev/nvme1n1p4
```

We exit the chroot environment with `exit` and reload the system:

```sh
root@rescue12-customer-eu (nsxxxxx.ip-xx-xx-xx.eu) ~ # sudo systemctl daemon-reload
```

We umount all the disks:

```sh
root@rescue12-customer-eu (nsxxxxx.ip-xx-xx-xx.eu) ~ # umount -Rl /mnt
```

We have now successfully completed the RAID rebuild on the server and we can now reboot it in normal mode.

<a name="normalmode"></a>

#### Rebuilding the RAID in normal mode

/// details | Unfold this section

If your server is able to boot in normal mode after a disk replacement, you can proceed with the following steps to rebuild the RAID:

> In our example, we replaced the disk **nvme1n1**.

Reviewer 2: In the previous examples (Disk fail simulation and rescue mode RAID rebuild), we failed the disk nvme0n1, then replaced it and synced it with nvme1n1.  They seem to be reversed in the normal mode RAID rebuild example, as this line states "we replaced the disk nvme1n1". This inversion is consistent across the rest of the section.

Author: Hello @SlimJ4 thank you for your review and your comments. I will correct the bullet point. Regarding the examples, I reversed the disks in normal mode in order to document the replacement of the secondary disk. However, after some additional verification, I have decided to update it to `nvme0n1`.
